In nine days time, we’ve made this a Substack best seller! 50-thousand subscriptions in nine days. 1,000 paid subscribers in nine days. And we’re going to take this to a new level in the weeks and months to come.

HERE’S WHAT COMING LATER IN APRIL:

My nightly program “Scott MacFarlane Reports” debuts next week — and it will post here. I’m adding premium editorial “look ahead” notes for subscribers and I am launching my Substack chat feature later this month too. I’ll need your help, with questions, comments, feedback and general “good vibes.”

Leaving the position of network news correspondent wasn’t easy. I’d dreamt of that job since I was 14 years old. And it took a quarter of a century from my first time in a radio studio to get to that mountaintop. I was a late “"network TV bloomer”! What’s more - best as I can tell - few, if any, people have ever voluntarily walked away from that gig.

I didn’t realize until this month: The mountain goes much, much higher. Independent journalism has limitless potential, loftier upside and a uniquely loyal audience.

This was the right move!

Everything is unfiltered now. The moment I have news … I can bring it directly to you. No need to wait for an elaborate TV studio set up…. or for the affiliate TV stations to pick up our feed. No need to alert several layers of managers.

If I think it’s news — and if I know it’s confirmed and reportable — no need to “pitch” the story to my editors. I can bring it right to you.

I love that your comments and questions can help guide me. Your questions helped me prepare for my Friday interview with Rep. Robert Garcia (D-CA), who is leading his party in the Congressional probe of the Trump Administration’s handling of the Epstein files.

You recommendations led me to investigate what possible investigations remain underway of deposed Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem.

You even helped me button-up the home studio with suggestions for looks and feels.

This is so liberating. My work can look however you and I want it to look (no need for a network makeup artist or fancy network arts-graphics package)

My favorite element: I can now share my behind-the-scenes daily planning note directly with you. I used to send that “day ahead” note to every producer, executive, anchor, platform manager and director inside CBS News. Yes.. I sent it to Bari Weiss each day too. These are my editorial notes on: What to watch for, What’s likely to pop in Washington and What questions I’d be trying to answer. These are the storylines you can’t simply find on a publicly-available schedule or press release.

Now it’s exclusively for you. And you’ve been giving me great feedback…. which helps!

If you’re a paid subscriber, I’ll be opening up a chat channel in which you recommend stories and issues to chase.

And I’ll be sharing more of the “cutting room” floor material from my interviews with subscribers here.

Please keep providing feedback. And please keep the face:

Together, we will get through this tough politically divisive moment.