In the predawn hours of April Fool’s Day, eight-year-old granddaughter Ela left this handwritten note taped to the refrigerator door:

To family

I just went for a walk

be back soon.

from Ela

It was dark outside. Cold, too--and foggy.

The frantic family search was on.

Meanwhile, Ela was ensconced in the kitchen pantry, trying not to giggle. This child. The physically smallest in her class with a personality the size of a Morning Glory cloud.

When my daughter texted an image of Ela’s note, I couldn’t stop laughing. I showed it to Sherrod, and he started laughing, too, which made me laugh even harder. My reaction was disproportionate, perhaps, but man it felt good to let loose. “Let’s go find the joy,” I tell Sherrod every morning before we part. On April 1, Ela made that an easy hunt.

I’ve been so angry lately.

In the past, whenever I have felt this way, I’d withdraw from public view until I could figure out what to do with all that stewing. Until recently--since January 20, 2025, to be precise--this was a rare occurrence and usually took only a few hours to resolve.

My former editor, Stuart Warner, once gave me this advice for column writing: “The angrier you are, the harder you should try to be funny.” Granted, some topics offer no punchlines, but his wise counsel has served me well over the years. Most opinions benefit from a period of reflection before hitting “send.”

It’s not that I don’t think a woman is entitled to her anger, nor do I believe she should hide it. I’m just not the writer who wants to drag everyone along with me as I stumble through that course of trenches, ditches and gullies. I am reminded of my mother’s admonishment: “Nobody needs to see your scrapes and bruises.” At a young age, I understood too well her reasons for wanting to believe that. Her desire to hide her injuries was steeped in pride, but also in what she thought was her wifely duty to protect the chief inflictor of her injuries. She was the embodiment of the brave front.

Unlike Mom, I’ve never been good at hiding my fury, and this is where I’ve hit a snag in recent weeks. My Substack is called Hopefully Yours, and from the very first column, on July 21, 2023, I have felt a duty to keep that promise. Easy-peasy, for a while. If I was upset, I’d go for long walks, deliver lengthy monologues to our dogs, and watch Nora Ephron films. That usually fixed things.

Alas, this strategy hasn’t been working for me these days. As one of my closest friends said, and not unkindly, “You have a lot of edges lately.” I couldn’t deny it.

I’m simmering all the time, it seems. I am never without hope, but lately I’ve had to muster the energy to roll a few boulders out of the way to find it. There’s nothing wrong with succumbing to frustration, but I have hesitated, over and over, to admit publicly that I was letting my outrage get the best of me. I should have shared that with you, rather than disappear.

I don’t require readers to pay for Hopefully Yours, but so many of you have done so anyway. This was one of the biggest surprises for me about Substack, and your generosity has made it possible for me to keep it open to everyone and to focus on the writing here.

I am also working on my next novel, tentatively titled Because You Asked. This has made Substack even more important because, as most writers know, writing begets writing. My main character has been wondering where the bloody hell I’ve been in the last month (the woman has a mouth on her), and she has no patience for boo-hoo me. I had left her in a most uncomfortable dilemma—which was entirely of her own making, I hasten to add. Still, she needs me to show up to help her figure out why she keeps doing this to herself. She has begun to pop into my dreams, rattling the cage. So like her.

You’ve had every reason to expect a weekly essay from me, and I have let you down in this new year that already feels road weary. I’m sorry. I’ve let down non-paying subscribers, too. We’ve all been having an ongoing conversation, and I hope you don’t feel ghosted.

I’m not suggesting any of you have ever clung to my every word, or that you’ve even missed me. For that, I have dogs, who act like abandoned children every time I fetch the mail. But many of you have reached out privately to see if I am okay, and that has weighed on my heart. The last thing I want to do is add to anyone’s list of worries. I’m doing as well as any American who is in a constant state of anger and anxiety over what is happening to our country.

See, there I go again. Every time, I begin writing one kind of essay and then pivot, landing in that muddy ravine, trying to claw my way out.

I can cite precisely when this relentless state of outrage started getting the best of me. It was the sight of that blue bunny hat, the one with the white floppy ears on the head of a sweet five-year-old boy named Liam.

You likely remember him, too, as this photo quickly went viral in January after Columbia Heights Public Schools shared it. That hand on his back belongs to an ICE agent, who is clutching Liam’s Spider-Man backpack, making sure he cannot leave. Agents detained both Liam and his father, who was here legally as an immigrant, and whisked them off to a family detention center in Texas, where they were held captive for nearly two weeks.

Schools Superintendent Zena Stenvik spoke for so many of us in her fury.

“Why detain a 5-year-old? You can’t tell me that this child is going to be classified as a violent criminal,” she said. “Another adult living in the home was outside and begged the agents to let him take care of the small child and was refused.