One of the more adventurous aspects of The Golden Thread has been its generous embrace of music, and its discussion of Western music’s most prominent figures. We have done this because one of the most remarkable things about what we sometimes call ‘classical music’ (or ‘concert music,’ or more self-defeatingly, ‘serious music’) has been its prominence in the Western tradition, and especially in the great explosion of formal music education, style, performance and (above all) writing from the sixteenth century onward. In fact, the development of a written form for notating music gives permanence to musical expression, and stands as a major achievement of the West just by itself. The Golden Thread devotes more than the usual amount of attention to music, not only for its own sake, but for the revealing places it occupies in the unfolding of the overall narrative of the Western tradition from the 1600s onward. For instance: the tonal vagaries of Wagner’s operas (and especially the later ones) are not unlinked to the larger Romantic undermining of Enlightenment reason and philosophy; Tchaikovsky is worth discussing, not only because he created no shortage of eminently-hummable tunes, but because his devotion to Mozart (which you can hear quite explicitly in his fourth Orchestral Suite) is a standing rebuke to the so-called ‘Eurasianist’ denial of Russia’s connections to the Western tradition.

So, music has a prominent place in The Golden Thread, and in this Substack, and from time to time, we will feature some deep dives into musical subjects which the space limitations of The Golden Thread otherwise discouraged.

It could be argued – and in fact, has been argued – that one important place in the West where ‘concert music’ never took serious hold was the United States. In 1935, a prominent American composer, Aaron Copland, complained that in America the composer “occupies little or no place even today in the mind of the public at large.”1 This was an extraordinary judgment, because the American musical landscape actually had been dotted with composers of concert music, starting in the 1790s with expatriates like Alexander Reinagle and Raynor Taylor, moving into the 1800s with George Frederick Bristow, William Henry Fry, Daniel Gregory Mason, Amy Beach, John Knowles Payne, and finally achieving a mountain-top in Charles Ives. But Americans of the 19th century also suffered from a distinct cultural inferiority-complex which is best known for how difficult it made life for American writers and poets who struggled to prevail against the tidal-wave of European literary imports. In music, this took the form of a manifest disbelief in the minds of 20th-century Americans that there had been anything of musical worth written before musical modernists (of whom Aaron Copland was a principal example in the 1930s).

One of the saddest examples of this erasure of American musical memory is how the name of Louis Moreau Gottschalk appears so infrequently when talking about American music in the 19th century. True, Gottschalk inhabits a different American musical world from even Bristow, Fry and Payne. Yet, what Bristow was to New York and Ives to rural Connecticut, Gottschalk is worth considering as a paladin of yet another inventive American musical stream which we can call Creole.

Creole is a term generally used to describe a peculiar blending of European and Caribbean ancestry in Francophone Louisiana. So it’s no surprise to discover that Gottschalk was born in 1829 in New Orleans, of mixed Creole and German Jewish ancestry (in that respect, he reminds us of a long line of similar 19th-century Louisianans which includes Judah P. Benjamin, Adah Menken, and Homer Plessy). By age four, he was already at the keyboard; at age twelve, he was packed off to Paris for further study and gave his first concert in 1845. He was hailed as “le jeune Americain, qui a un grand talent musical.” A year later, he wrote his first piano work, the Chopin-esque Polka de Salon; by 1850 he was pulling in fees of 10,000 francs from his publishers for a single composition.2 He returned to the United States to become a touring phenomenon in 1853. It was Gottschalk’s unhappy lot only to live til age forty; and perhaps even more unhappy, to be known today only for a few exuberant piano pieces which seem to jibe with the spirit of Stephen Foster (“The Banjo” and “The Union”) and are thus easily dismissed as only a slight variation on cheap commercial tune-manufacture.

This is an enormous mistake, first because it misses the substantial catalog of Gottschalk’s compositions (see the eleven solo works on Richard Rosenberg’s 1999 Naxos recording and the forty pieces in Alex Mandel’s Vox Box collection and the muti-disc set of recordings by Philip Martin). But second, it shortchanges the significance of Creole, which plays an explicit role in almost half of Gottschalk’s oeuvre, and which underlies the rest.

The place to begin, in understanding Gottschalk, is in understanding Creole. We can typify Creole by describing it in the following ways:

· most obviously, it is synthetic; it embraces French colonial patterns, but combines them with overlays of African, Caribbean, German, Spanish and Anglo-American. David Hackett Fischer captures this in African Founders: How Enslaved People Expanded American Ideals, where he parallels various linguistic Creole-isms, starting with the “Black Dutch” of the Hudson Valley and reaching to the Gombo of the lower Mississippi Delta. This is often dismissed as “syncretistic,” but Fischer is more impressed by the flexibility of absorption than the purism of racial and cultural “centering.”