In a mountain valley in northern New Mexico, both humans and bees were preparing for winter. At Addelina Lucero’s adobe home in the Native American community of Taos Pueblo, a huge pile of firewood lay beside two stacks of rectangular beehives caked with red propolis, a resinous mixture that bees use to seal their homes for the coming months of cold and scarcity.

Indigenous beekeeper and National Geographic Explorer Melanie Kirby donned a lightweight mesh veil and pried open one of Lucero’s hives, pulling out the hanging frames and examining them to locate the colony’s queen, which was twice the size of the workers. “This is our mother breeder,” she said as Lucero looked on. “She’s survived many seasons.”

That’s sadly uncommon these days. Bees around the globe have been dying off in massive numbers, suffering an onslaught of woes: parasites, pathogens, pesticides, dwindling habitat. We’ve learned of these declines mostly from honeybees, whose lives are intertwined with human agriculture because beekeepers haul millions of hives to pollinate everything from almonds to apples, as well as dozens of other fruits and vegetables. Along with the 20,000-plus other bee species, they help pollinate roughly a third of the planet’s food supply and ensure the reproduction of more than three-quarters of all flowering plants. While we know less about wild bees, population surveys indicate that bees worldwide are in decline, from solitary species like leaf-cutter bees that nest alone and pollinate a few preferred plants to social ones like native bumblebees that live in colonies and collect nectar and pollen from nearly any flower they encounter.

In April 2025, American beekeepers reported that 55 percent of their colonies had perished over the previous year—their worst losses ever. Kirby’s honeybees, however, are thriving. She’s spent the past 20 years working with her farming partner Mark Spitzig to breed and raise colonies, cleverly branded “LongeviBEES,” that are well adapted to New Mexico’s high desert and the Rocky Mountain region. Kirby and Spitzig don’t treat their hives with the synthetic chemicals most commercial beekeepers use to fend off the varroa mite, an invasive parasite that feeds on bees, weakening colonies and carrying viruses, and is thought to be the primary culprit in recent die-offs. Instead, they wait to breed their queens until after they’ve lived for at least two years—long enough to prove the bees are hardy and wily enough to survive on their own.

Ten years ago, Kirby brought some of those bees to Lucero, who creates candles, balms, and salves from the beeswax she harvests. Kirby’s instructions were simple: Leave the bees mostly alone, and let them learn to solve the challenges of their volatile world. And they have. “They really can figure things out,” said Lucero.

Over the past few decades, scientists have been learning more and more about the ways that bees figure things out. They’ve studied how honeybee foragers fan out across miles of unfamiliar terrain in their six-week adult lifespan, navigating by sunlight and memory as they visit thousands of flowers to retrieve nectar for their colonies. They’ve followed bees back to their nests and seen how they dance to tell others where the best flowers are, and how they make collective decisions to swarm and relocate their homes.

Now researchers are uncovering remarkable new insights into how these industrious insects think. The breakthroughs have arrived thanks to a series of creative experiments designed to test how bees perceive the world, solve problems, and respond to unexpected situations. And the results have found that a single bee is much smarter than almost anyone imagined. These tiny creatures can make the sort of intelligent decisions that scientists previously believed were possible only in vertebrates.

Kirby’s sturdy and resistant bees also hint at a tantalizing possibility for people who are concerned about the insects’ long-term survival. As she sees every day in her apiaries, bees can adapt to their increasingly challenging surroundings—if we let them.

There was a time not too long ago when scientists believed that bees were automatons—mindless robots whose actions were hardwired into their genes. Even the most eminent scholars of animal behavior believed that bees’ actions were guided purely by instinct—“inherited through countless generations,” wrote German scientist Karl von Frisch, who won a Nobel Prize in 1973 for discovering how bees communicate. “The brain of a bee is the size of a grass seed and is not made for thinking.”

But in recent decades, researchers like behavioral ecologist Lars Chittka have designed a series of increasingly ambitious experiments that reveal the many ways that bees’ brains are indeed made for thinking. In 1990, when Chittka was studying bee neurobiology as a Ph.D. candidate in Berlin, he led a group of undergraduates to a gigantic agricultural field to explore how bees estimate distance and direction in a featureless landscape with no trees, bushes, or hills.

Over a bottle of Irish whiskey one night, they decided, as a joke, to design an experiment to see whether bees could count. “We initially laughed. It was a ridiculous idea,” he recalls.

But the next day, they constructed a row of identical, tent-shaped objects to act as landmarks for a colony of honeybees going back and forth to their hive. They placed a feeder filled with sugar water, to mimic nectar, between the third and fourth landmarks. Then, once the bees were familiar with the location of the feeder, the students varied the tents’ positions. The bees, however, still searched for the feeder after the third tent. They seemed to count the number of landmarks they passed on their way to the feeder. “At the time, that raised some eyebrows,” Chittka says, but other labs replicated the results and confirmed his findings. The success of that experiment, he says, “triggered me to probe even deeper into how much intelligence you could squeeze into a micro-brain like that.”