As the first RCT of its kind, our study supports the feasibility,
acceptability, and effectiveness of a fine-tuned,
fully GenAI–powered chatbot for treating mental health symptoms. Users demonstrated sustained engagement
and rated their alliance with Therabot as comparable
to human therapists during the 4-week trial. Critically,
as compared with the WLC, Therabot users showed a
greater reduction in depression, anxiety, and CHR-FED
symptoms at postintervention (4 weeks) and at follow-up
(8 weeks). We posit that Therabot’s success is driven by
three main factors. First, akin to effective rule-based conversational
agents,18 Therabot is rooted in evidence-based
psychotherapies for anxiety,35 depression,36 and weight
concerns.37 Second, users had unrestricted access to
Therabot, allowing for any time–anywhere interactions.
Notably, the ability to access therapeutic support when
most needed, regardless of the time or location, may be
one of the most significant advantages of DTx. Third,
unlike existing chatbots for mental health treatment,
Therabot was powered by Gen-AI, allowing for natural,
highly personalized, open-ended dialogue. Moreover, we
argue that the Gen-AI approach promoted the therapeutic
alliance, a critical nonspecific mediator of change in
psychotherapy.38 Although some evidence supports developing
a therapeutic alliance with rule-based agents,19 we see such a bond as inherently limited compared with that
possible with Gen-AI–powered agents; Gen-AI provides
greater capacity for personalized adaptation and more
closely resembles human–human interaction. Our results
suggest that, within 4 weeks, participants were able to
develop a working alliance comparable to that shown in
an outpatient psychotherapy sample,32 with use at consistently
high rates.
Although existing companion Gen-AI chatbots can be
highly engaging, they are not trained or evaluated for treating
clinical-level mental health symptoms. Such chatbots
may also be compromised by competing interests, such as
user engagement or profit, which may be at odds with best
practices for treatment.39 Therefore, Gen-AI conversational
agents tailored to integrate both evidence-based techniques
and important nonspecific factors contributing to psychotherapy
outcomes represent a significant opportunity to
provide scalable, on-demand, and effective mental health
treatment. The nascency of Gen-AI and associated risks
have likely contributed to the absence of a clinically validated
Gen-AI chatbot for mental health treatment. Indeed, the nondeterministic nature of Gen-AI models introduces
the possibility of hallucinations and incorrect or potentially
harmful content.22 While human-delivered therapy is not
immune to patient iatrogenesis,40 such effects in Gen-AI
models have the potential to impact more people and are
less regulated. We emphasize the need to understand Gen-AI’s potential
role and risks associated with mental health treatment and
also the need for guardrails and close human supervision
while testing such methods. All content was closely supervised
for quality and safety in our trial, with rapid expert
intervention available. This approach may continue to be
necessary when testing similar future models to ensure
safety. In addition, given the inscrutable black-box nature
of Gen-AI models, the inner processes are difficult or
impossible to understand analytically. In this way, Gen-AI
models are similar to human minds — intractable in complexity
and predominantly studied by the data they produce
— and thus may require extensive observation to obtain a
reliable assessment.
Our results have important implications, forming the early
foundational evidence for the use of fine-tuned Gen-AI–
powered chatbots in mental health treatment. Therabot
shows promise as a means to scale evidence-based therapies
in a way that maintains a high degree of personalization
and engagement. Furthermore, our approach enables
novel translations of therapeutic techniques that are not
possible in rule-based agents. Consider, for instance,
detailed and personalized imaginal exposures prompted by
Gen-AI agents. Interventions dependent on the therapeutic
alliance or specific patient–therapist interactions may also
benefit from the integration of Gen-AI chatbots. 
Our study has notable strengths, including a nationally
recruited, demographically diverse, moderate sample size.
Furthermore, unlike many digital mental health studies,41
Therabot ran on both Android and iOS devices, increasing
generalizability. However, we also acknowledge several
limitations. First, given our recruitment strategy, there
was potential for selection bias toward younger, more
technologically minded participants who were open to AI.
However, this may also resemble the most likely end users.
Relatedly, up-front disclosure of a monetary incentive may
have introduced selection bias, favoring participants who
were motivated financially. Second, the characteristic of
WLC RCTs is that there was potential for differential contact
between the intervention and control group. We helped
mitigate this by planning equivalent contact between
groups whenever possible. Last, our follow-up period was
limited to 4 weeks postintervention (weeks 4–8). While this
allowed for testing early effectiveness and safety, longer
studies are needed to assess the durability of Therabot’s
effectiveness.
Overall, results from the Therabot RCT are highly promising.
We found high engagement and acceptability of the
intervention, as well as symptom decreases while maintaining
a therapeutic alliance comparable to that of human
therapists and their patients. Future work may extend the
range of psychopathologies treated (e.g., obsessive–compulsive
disorders), the settings in which Gen-AI chatbots are
provided (e.g., emergency rooms), and the role of the Gen-
AI chatbot (e.g., adjunctive to in-person psychotherapy).
Furthermore, future work should build on our descriptive
user engagement metrics to define clinical thresholds pertaining
to minimal doses of Gen-AI–driven therapies. Our
study provides key groundwork for the development of
Gen-AI chatbots for mental health treatment.
