
Overview. The AI Scientist has three main phases (Figure 1): (1) Idea Generation, (2) Experimental Iteration, and (3) Paper Write-up. After the write-up, we introduce and validate an
LLM-generated review to assess the quality of the generated paper (Section 4). We provide The A I
Sc ient ist with a starting code template that reproduces a lightweight baseline training run from a
popular model or benchmark. For example, this could be code that trains a small transformer on the
works of Shakespeare (Karpathy, 2022), a classic proof-of-concept training run from natural language
processing that completes within a few minutes. The A I Sc ient ist is then free to explore any
possible research direction. The template also includes a LaTeX folder that contains style files and
section headers, along with simple plotting code. We provide further details on the templates in
Section 6, but in general, each run starts with a representative small-scale experiment relevant to
the topic area. The focus on small-scale experiments is not a fundamental limitation of our method,
but simply for computational efficiency reasons and compute constraints on our end. We provide the
prompts for all stages in Appendix A.
1. Idea Generation. Given a starting template, The AI Scientist first “brainstorms” a diverse set
of novel research directions. We take inspiration from evolutionary computation and open-endedness
research (Brant and Stanley, 2017; Lehman et al., 2008; Stanley, 2019; Stanley et al., 2017) and
iteratively grow an archive of ideas using LLMs as the mutation operator (Faldor et al., 2024; Lehman
et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2024). Each idea comprises a description, experiment
execution plan, and (self-assessed) numerical scores of interestingness, novelty, and feasibility. At each
iteration, we prompt the language model to generate an interesting new research direction conditional
on the existing archive, which can include the numerical review scores from completed previous ideas.
We use multiple rounds of chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022) and self-reflection (Shinn et al., 2024)
to refine and develop each idea. After idea generation, we filter ideas by connecting the language
model with the Semantic Scholar API (Fricke, 2018) and web access as a tool (Schick et al., 2024).
This allows The AI Scientist to discard any idea that is too similar to existing literature.
2. Experiment Iteration. Given an idea and a template, the second phase of The AI Scientist
first executes the proposed experiments and then visualizes its results for the downstream write-up.
The AI Scientist uses Aider to first plan a list of experiments to run and then executes them
in order. We make this process more robust by returning any errors upon a failure or time-out (e.g.
experiments taking too long to run) to Aider to fix the code and re-attempt up to four times.
After the completion of each experiment, Aider is then given the results and told to take notes in
the style of an experimental journal. Currently, it only conditions on text but in future versions, this
could include data visualizations or any modality. Conditional on the results, it then re-plans and
implements the next experiment. This process is repeated up to five times. Upon completion of
4
The AI Scientist: Towards Fully Automated Open-Ended Scientific Discovery
experiments, Aider is prompted to edit a plotting script to create figures for the paper using Python.
The AI Scientist makes a note describing what each plot contains, enabling the saved figures
and experimental notes to provide all the information required to write up the paper. At all steps,
Aider sees its history of execution.
Note that, in general, the provided initial seed plotting and experiment templates are small, selfcontained files. The AI Scientist frequently implements entirely new plots and collects new
metrics that are not in the seed templates. This ability to arbitrarily edit the code occasionally leads
to unexpected outcomes (Section 8).
