The goal of reducing sequential computation also forms the foundation of the Extended Neural GPU [16], ByteNet [18] and ConvS2S [9], all of which use convolutional neural networks as basic building block, computing hidden representations in parallel for all input and output positions. In these models, the number of operations required to relate signals from two arbitrary input or output positions grows in the distance between positions, linearly for ConvS2S and logarithmically for ByteNet. This makes it more difficult to learn dependencies between distant positions [12]. In the Transformer this is reduced to a constant number of operations, albeit at the cost of reduced effective resolution due to averaging attention-weighted positions, an effect we counteract with Multi-Head Attention as described in section 3.2. Self-attention, sometimes called intra-attention is an attention mechanism relating different positions of a single sequence in order to compute a representation of the sequence. Self-attention has been used successfully in a variety of tasks including reading comprehension, abstractive summarization, textual entailment and learning task-independent sentence representations [4, 27, 28, 22]. End-to-end memory networks are based on a recurrent attention mechanism instead of sequencealigned recurrence and have been shown to perform well on simple-language question answering and language modeling tasks [34]. To the best of our knowledge, however, the Transformer is the first transduction model relying entirely on self-attention to compute representations of its input and output without using sequencealigned RNNs or convolution. In the following sections, we will describe the Transformer, motivate self-attention and discuss its advantages over models such as [17, 18] and [9].
Most competitive neural sequence transduction models have an encoder-decoder structure [5, 2, 35].
Here, the encoder maps an input sequence of symbol representations (x1, ..., xn) to a sequence
of continuous representations z = (z1, ..., zn). Given z, the decoder then generates an output
sequence (y1, ..., ym) of symbols one element at a time. At each step the model is auto-regressive
[10], consuming the previously generated symbols as additional input when generating the next.
The Transformer follows this overall architecture using stacked self-attention and point-wise, fully
connected layers for both the encoder and decoder, shown in the left and right halves of Figure 1, respectively.
Encoder: The encoder is composed of a stack of N = 6 identical layers. Each layer has two
sub-layers. The first is a multi-head self-attention mechanism, and the second is a simple, positionwise fully connected feed-forward network. We employ a residual connection [11] around each of
the two sub-layers, followed by layer normalization [1]. That is, the output of each sub-layer is
LayerNorm(x + Sublayer(x)), where Sublayer(x) is the function implemented by the sub-layer
itself. To facilitate these residual connections, all sub-layers in the model, as well as the embedding
layers, produce outputs of dimension dmodel = 512.
Decoder: The decoder is also composed of a stack of N = 6 identical layers. In addition to the two sub-layers in each encoder layer, the decoder inserts a third sub-layer, which performs multi-head
attention over the output of the encoder stack. Similar to the encoder, we employ residual connections
around each of the sub-layers, followed by layer normalization. We also modify the self-attention
sub-layer in the decoder stack to prevent positions from attending to subsequent positions. This
masking, combined with fact that the output embeddings are offset by one position, ensures that the
predictions for position i can depend only on the known outputs at positions less than i.
In this section we compare various aspects of self-attention layers to the recurrent and convolutional layers commonly used for mapping one variable-length sequence of symbol representations
(x1, ..., xn) to another sequence of equal length (z1, ..., zn), with xi, zi ∈ R d, such as a hidden
layer in a typical sequence transduction encoder or decoder. Motivating our use of self-attention we
consider three desiderata.
One is the total computational complexity per layer. Another is the amount of computation that can
be parallelized, as measured by the minimum number of sequential operations required.
The third is the path length between long-range dependencies in the network. Learning long-range
dependencies is a key challenge in many sequence transduction tasks. One key factor affecting the
ability to learn such dependencies is the length of the paths forward and backward signals have to
traverse in the network. The shorter these paths between any combination of positions in the input
and output sequences, the easier it is to learn long-range dependencies [12]. Hence we also compare
the maximum path length between any two input and output positions in networks composed of the
different layer types
