One role of autophagy in cellular defense is to remove invading pathogens. Although bacterial pathogens that invade cells through endocytosis are usually delivered to lysosomes and degraded there (by a process termed phagocytosis), some of them escape the host defense mechanism by blocking or altering the maturation of the sequestering vesicle, the phagosome. For example, after entering into host cells through the endocytic pathway, the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes destroys the phagosome membrane using hemolysin, enters the cytoplasm, and multiplies there (Fig. 3). However, when infected cells are treated with chloramphenicol, an inhibitor of bacterial protein synthesis, after phagosome lysis, the bacteria are trapped by autophagosomes (45). Moreover, sequestration is enhanced by autophagic induction through serum withdrawal, whereas the autophagy inhibitors 3-methyladenine or wortmannin block uptake of this and other bacterial pathogens (46). Finally, a recent study shows that, when Streptococcus pyogenes escapes from the endosomes of nonphagocytic cells, it becomes engulfed within autophagosomes (47); subsequent autophagic degradation decreases the number of viable pathogens. Thus, autophagy can protect against bacteria that attempt to establish a replicative niche by entering the host cytoplasm.Nevertheless, some types of bacterial pathogens such as Porphyromonas gingivalis, Brucella abortus, and Legionella pneumophila use the mechanism of autophagy to replicate by sheltering in autophagosome-like vesicles, thus subverting the autophagic pathway (48). After being taken up by phagosomes, these bacteria enter into double-membrane structures that exhibit features of autophagosomes, instead of completing the process of phagocytosis, although the mechanism by which bacteria are sequestered by autophagosomes is unclear. In many cases, the bacterial type IV secretion pathway is required for autophagic subversion. For example, Legionella pneumophila requires a type IV secretion system encoded by the icm/dot (intracellular multiplication/defect in organelle trafficking) genes to become established inside the autophagosome-like vesicles (49-51). These gene products may activate formation of the sequestering vesicles or may delay their maturation to allow the bacteria to remain within these normally transient compartments and to replicate. Accordingly, treatment of the infected cells with autophagy inhibitors directs the bacteria into a phagocytic pathway and increases the rate of delivery to the lysosome. In contrast, infection and intracellular replication of L. pneumophila in Dictyostelium discoideum appears to be independent of autophagy (52), which possibly reflects host-specific differences.The appearance of autophagy-like structures also occurs after viral infection (53). Autophagy is induced through the activation of the double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase R (PKR) following infection by herpes simplex virus (HSV) (54). PKR is a eukaryotic translation initiation factor-2$\alpha$ (eIF2$\alpha$) kinase; phosphorylation of eIF2$\alpha$ by PKR results in translational arrest, which inhibits viral replication, and it also contributes to the induction of autophagy. HSV encodes a gene for a protein that antagonizes phosphorylation of eIF2$\alpha$ and thus acts to inhibit autophagy. Infection by HSV lacking this gene induces autophagy, whereas the wild-type virus does not. The induction of autophagy by the compromised HSV is not seen in either PKR-deficient cells or cells expressing only mutant eIF2$\alpha$ whose phosphorylation site is lost. Because viral replication is dependent on PKR inactivation (55), autophagy may be a mechanism of eliminating intracellular viruses. Another regulatory pathway that induces autophagy in response to viral infection may involve activation of receptor-interacting protein (RIP) (9). Caspase-8 inactivates RIP during apoptosis, but some viruses are able to inhibit caspase activity. The subsequent activation of RIP may trigger autophagy as an alternative means of killing the infected cell (3). Host defense pathways exert strong evolutionary pressure on microbes to acquire the means to bypass the host's killing and clearance mechanisms, as noted above for certain bacteria. A similar situation likely exists for viral pathogens. For example, there are indications that the replication complex of certain RNA viruses is localized on the membrane of autophagosome-like structures that are induced by viral infection (46). It is not clear, however, whether the induction of autophagy contributes to the degradation of the replication complex or to viral replication. After infection, the replication complex of mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) localizes on a membrane structure that can be labeled with green fluorescent protein tagged LC3, GFP-LC3 (an ortholog of yeast Atg8), an autophagosome marker, in wild-type mouse embryonic stem cells (56). More important, recovery of extracellular virus decreases in $Atg5^{-/-}$ mouse embryonic stem cells by a factor of 1000, which suggests that components of the autophagic machinery are required for replication of MHV, and probably for other viruses, rather than for elimination of viral particles.Recent genetic analyses in various organisms have resulted in the identification of genes involved in controlling longevity. The best-characterized pathway is the insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) pathway, which is highly conserved in eukaryotes from yeast to human (57). This signaling cascade includes a tyrosine kinase receptor, PtdIns 3-kinase and Akt/PKB, all of which are also involved in tumorigenesis as described above. In the case of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, inactivation of this cascade extends life-span up to 300% and increases heat and oxidative stress resistance, which may contribute to life-span extension. Because Akt/PKB controls the activity of Tor, the autophagy inhibitor, the down-regulation of the Akt/PKB pathway may also induce autophagy, so that autophagy may partly account for life-span extension. Along these lines, elimination or depletion of the TOR kinase/LET-363 also results in an increase in life-span (58). A loss-of-function mutation in the insulin-like tyrosine kinase receptor daf-2 extends life-span in C. elegans twofold; however, the inactivation of bec-1, the nematode ortholog of the yeast and mammalian VPS30/ATG6/beclin1 gene that is essential for autophagy, by RNAi cancels this effect, which suggests that autophagy is required for the life-span extension resulting from down-regulation of the insulin/IGF-1 pathway (59). This agrees with the finding that the life-span extension resulting from RNAi-mediated inhibition of TOR is not additive with daf-2 (58).