In her book, Philosophy in a New Key, Susanne Langer remarks that certain ideas burst upon the
intellectual landscape with a tremendous force. They resolve so many fundamental problems at
once that they seem also to promise that they will resolve all fundamental problems, clarify all
obscure issues. Everyone snaps them up as the open sesame of some new positive science, the
conceptual center-point around which a comprehensive system of analysis can be built. The
sudden vogue of such a grande ideé, crowding out almost everything else for a while, is due, she
says, "to the fact that all sensitive and active minds turn at once to exploiting it. We try it in every
connection, for every purpose, experiment with possible stretches of its strict meaning, with
generalizations and derivatives."
After we have become familiar with the new idea, however, after it has become part of our
general stock of theoretical concepts, our expectations are brought more into balance with its
actual uses, and its excessive popularity is ended. A few zealots persist in the old key-to-the universe view of it; but less driven thinkers settle down after a while to the problems the idea has
really generated. They try to apply it and extend it where it applies and where it is capable of
extension; and they desist where it does not apply or cannot be extended. It becomes, if it was, in
truth, a seminal idea in the first place, a permanent and enduring part of our intellectual armory.
But it no longer has the grandiose, all-promising scope, the infinite versatility of apparent
application, it once had.
The second law of thermodynamics, or the principle of natural selection, or the notion of
unconscious motivation, or the organization of the means of production does not explain
everything, not even everything human, but it still explains something; and our attention shifts to
isolating just what that something is, to disentangling ourselves from a lot of pseudoscience to
which, in the first flush of its celebrity, it has also given rise.
Whether or not this is, in fact, the way all centrally important scientific concepts develop, I don't
know. But certainly this pattern fits the concept of culture, around which the whole discipline of
anthropology arose, and whose domination that discipline has been increasingly concerned to
limit, specify, focus, and contain. lt is to this cutting of the culture concept down to size, therefore
actually insuring its continued importance rather than undermining it, that the essays below are
all, in their several ways and from their several directions, dedicated. They all argue, sometimes
explicitly, more often merely through the particular analysis they develop, for a narrowed,
specialized, and, so I imagine, theoretically more powerful concept of culture to replace E. B.
Tylor's famous "most complex whole," which, its originative power not denied, seems to me to
have reached the point where it obscures a good deal more than it reveals. 

In the face of this sort of theoretical diffusion, even a somewhat constricted and not entirely
standard concept of culture, which is at least internally coherent and, more important, which has a
definable argument to make is (as, to be fair, Kluckhohn himself keenly realized) an improvement.
Eclecticism is self-defeating not because there is only one direction in which it is useful to move,
but because there are so many: it is necessary to choose.

The concept of culture I espouse, and whose utility the essays below attempt to demonstrate, is
essentially a semiotic one. Believing, with Max Weber, that man is an animal suspended in webs
of significance he himself has spun, I take culture to be those webs, and the analysis of it to be
therefore not an experimental science in search of law but an interpretive one in search of
meaning. It is explication I am after, construing social expressions on their surface enigmatical.
But this pronouncement, a doctrine in a clause, demands itself some explication.

Operationalism as a methodological dogma never made much sense so far as the social
sciences are concerned, and except for a few rather toowell-swept corners--Skinnerian
behaviorism, intelligence testing, and so on--it is largely dead now. But it had, for all that, an
important point to make, which, however we may feel about trying to define charisma or alienation
in terms of operations, retains a certain force: if you want to understand what a science is, you
should look in the first instance not at its theories or its findings, and certainly not at what its
apologists say about it; you should look at what the practitioners of it do.

In anthropology, or anyway social anthropology, what the practioners do is ethnography. And it is
in understanding what ethnography is, or more exactly what doing ethnography is, that a start can
be made toward grasping what anthropological analysis amounts to as a form of knowledge. This,
it must immediately be said, is not a matter of methods. From one point of view, that of the
textbook, doing ethnography is establishing rapport, selecting informants, transcribing texts,
taking genealogies, mapping fields, keeping a diary, and so on. But it is not these things,
techniques and received procedures, that define the enterprise.