Ancient physicians—including those from China in 2600 BC and Hippocrates around 400 BC—believed in the value of physical activity for health. By the 20th century, however, a diametrically opposite view—that exercise was dangerous—prevailed instead.1 During the early 20th century, complete bed rest was prescribed for patients with acute myocardial infarction. And, at the time of the 100th boat race between the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, UK, in 1954, the senior health officer of Cambridge University undertook a study to investigate the alleged dangers of exercise by comparing university sportsmen with intellectuals.1
One of the pioneers whose work helped to change that tide of popular opinion was Jerry Morris, who undertook the first rigorous, epidemiological studies investigating physical inactivity and chronic disease risk, published in 1953.2 Since then, much evidence has clearly documented the many health benefits of physical activity (panel 1).3, 4, 5 Despite this knowledge, a large proportion of the world's population remains physically inactive. To quantify the effect of physical inactivity on the world's major non-communicable diseases, we estimated how much of these diseases could be averted in the population if inactive people were to become active, as well as how much gain in life expectancy could occur at the population level. We focus on the major non-communicable diseases emphasised by the UN as threats to global health:6 coronary heart disease; cancer, specifically breast and colon cancers, which are convincingly related to physical inactivity; and type 2 diabetes.

Worldwide, we estimated that physical inactivity causes 6–10% of the major non-communicable diseases of coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and breast and colon cancers. Furthermore, this unhealthy behaviour causes 9% of premature mortality, or more than 5·3 of the 57 million deaths in 2008.18 With elimination of physical inactivity, life expectancy of the world's population might be expected to increase by 0·68 years. These findings make inactivity similar to the established risk factors of smoking and obesity. The added years of life need to be interpreted correctly: they seem low because they represent gains in the whole population (including inactive and active people), rather than in inactive people who become active. Because all the gain accrues to people who move from inactive to active, the increase in life expectancy in the inactive group alone is greater. For perspective, other research done in the USA estimated that inactive people would gain 1·3–3·7 years from age 50 years by becoming active.20, 21 In an east Asian population, life expectancy from age 30 years in active people was 2·6–4·2 years greater than that in inactive people.19
How does physical inactivity compare with other risk factors for poor health? Although risk factors are classified on different scales (thus, the proportion at risk varies across risk factors), it is nonetheless informative to look at two established risk factors targeted for government action worldwide: smoking and obesity. Smoking was estimated to cause about 5 million deaths worldwide in 2000.22 The proportion of deaths attributable to smoking in China, one of the top five cigarette-consuming countries, has been estimated at 3·1% for women and 12·9% for men.23 By elimination of smoking, life expectancy at age 50 years was estimated to increase by 2·3–2·5 years in the US population and 1·1–2·2 years in the populations of nine other high-income countries.24 At an individual level, Beijing never-smokers aged 55 years and older had a life expectancy 4·2–8·8 years longer than that of present smokers.25 As for obesity, if all obese people in the USA were to attain normal weight, life expectancy in the population was estimated to increase by 0·7–1·1 years at birth in one analysis26 and 0·5–0·7 years at age 50 years in another.24 Thus, physical inactivity seems to have an effect similar to that of smoking or obesity.
The present analysis updates information from a 2004 WHO report27 and additionally estimates added years of life expectancy in the population. In the WHO report, because of unavailability of data needed for the preferred PAF formula, the incorrect formula (formula 1) was used. Their PAFs ranged from 10% for breast cancer to 22% for coronary heart disease—similar to the present estimate for breast cancer, but larger for coronary heart disease. In part, this difference is because the RR of breast cancer for physical inactivity is not confounded by other variables (unadjusted RR 1·34, adjusted RR 1·33), whereas that for coronary heart disease is (unadjusted RR 1·33, adjusted RR 1·16). Further, we conservatively used a pooled RR for coronary heart disease that compared physical inactivity with the minimum recommended activity level using recently published data,10 whereas WHO used data available at the time of their analysis that compared extreme activity categories, yielding RRs of larger magnitude.

Our estimates are likely to be very conservative. First, the RRs were almost always based on self-reported physical activity levels,28 which are imprecise. In prospective studies in which self-reports cannot be biased by the outcomes studied (since they have not yet occurred at the time of reporting), random reporting errors result in underestimation of the RRs. Some studies of physical fitness—a related measure to physical activity that is more objectively measured—show stronger magnitudes of association with non-communicable diseases29 (which also might reflect inherited physiological and metabolic characteristics related to both fitness and a favourable risk profile). Second, the pooled RRs were derived from maximally adjusted RRs in the primary studies. Often, these RRs were adjusted for characteristics such as blood pressure, lipid profile, and glucose or insulin sensitivity. These could be overadjustments, since physical activity reduces risk of coronary heart disease and premature mortality partly through beneficial effects on these variables (a recent analysis suggested an attenuation of about 10% in the RR10). For type 2 diabetes, we used RRs adjusted for BMI—also conservative, since physical activity plays an important part in weight management.3 Third, we used the same RR to calculate PAFs for all countries, based on data mainly from North America and Europe. Whether physical inactivity has similar effects in other populations is unclear. For example, we used a pooled adjusted RR for coronary heart disease of 1·16; however, a study in India reported a larger adjusted RR (2·27, 95% CI 1·41–3·70).30 However, our pooled adjusted RR for all-cause mortality, 1·28, is similar to that of 1·25 (95% CI 1·18–1·33) in an east Asian study, comparing inactive people with those meeting minimum physical activity recommendations.19 Fourth, we assumed physical activity to reduce all-cause mortality rates only at ages 40–79 years. In a sensitivity analysis that extended the benefit to age 40 years and older, larger gains in life expectancy were obtained. Fifth, we used one RR instead of a range of RRs to reflect the dose-response relation between physical inactivity and risks of non-communicable disease because sparse data are available for the dose-response relation.10 In an illustrative example using China, we showed that applying less stringent assumptions increased PAF by 18% (9·8% vs 8·3%) and life expectancy by 69% (1·03 vs 0·61 years) compared with calculations made under standard assumptions.