To develop a theory is to answer the fundamental “why”
question about observed regularities in the focal phenomenon
of interest (Berger et al., 2010). As such, to theorize HMC,
one needs to identify consistent patterns in people’s reactions
to machines, propose the mechanisms to explain why such
patterns exist, and put them to empirical tests for validation.
Can mindlessness and/or machine heuristic serve as the core
mechanism that predicts and explains the processes and
effects of HMC? Are there any alternative explanations?
More important, do we need a theory exclusively about
HMC or can it be subsumed within the purview of a general
communication theory?
In attempts to address these questions, the current essay
reviewed how mindlessness and machine heuristic have been
conceptualized and operationalized in the literature and
raised some questions about their viability as a theoretical explanation
for CASA in particular, and for HMC in general.
After identifying potential incompatibilities, an alternative
model informed by the authenticity model of computermediated
communication (Lee, 2020) was proposed to reconcile
the two research traditions and develop an integrative
theory of HMC. Although the authenticity model was developed
for human–human communication via computer, it may
also help explain human communication with computer by
integrating the source type (human vs. machine) as a variable.
With the seamless integration of AI technology into numerous
applications and services, it has become critical to ensure
transparency concerning the specific roles and functions of AI
from the ethical standpoint, but less clear is how users process
such information, and with what consequences. Both CASA
and machine heuristic studies assume that people are mindful
of the source, even if they often fail to adjust their expectations
and reactions accordingly. However, recent findings
(e.g., Lee et al., 2022; Tandoc et al., 2020) suggest that people
may not be sufficiently mindful of the source, unless they need
to. Insofar as they enjoy the conversation, obtain useful information
from the news article, and appreciate the song they listen
to, why should they care who does the talking, wrote the
news, and composed the song? After all, we are cognitive
misers (Fiske & Taylor, 1984). If so, minding the source, as a
cue, and relying on associated cognitive shortcut (i.e., machine
heuristic) to make judgments and decisions, which the
ELM has considered as an indication of less mindful processing,
may in fact reflect rather effortful and elaborate processing
of communication.
Moreover, recent technological breakthroughs seem to
challenge the CASA’s key premise that it is unreasonable and
irrational to treat computers like humans. For instance, we
are witnessing an increasing number of virtual humans who
look like a human, dance like a human, and talk like a human
(https://www.virtualhumans.org/). Why then should following
a virtual influencer be different from admiring BTS or
BLACKPINK? When conversing with a social chatbot who is
always there whenever I need him/her and listens to whatever
I want to vent without worrying about a leak (Brandtzaeg
et al., 2022), disregarding the agent’s ontological identity can
be a fairly rational choice to gratify one’s hedonistic needs,
maximizing the pleasure and emotional support one can derive
from the “friendship.” In the age of multiple identities
that are in constant flux, it may not be too different from engaging
with a role-playing partner in the metaverse, wherein
users are fully aware that the avatars’ appearance and personality
may not match the “real” person behind the cartoon
character, and yet, suspend their disbelief to get fully immersed
in the virtual world and enjoy the experience.
Once people mind the source, then their beliefs about
machines in general will direct how the source type affects
their subsequent reactions. Thus far, studies employing the
machine heuristic tend to focus on machines’ agentic, rather
than communal, qualities of largely positive connotations,
such as being objective, accurate, precise, and error-free (see
Molina & Sundar, 2022 for an exception). While those are undoubtedly core traits people seem to associate with
machines at the moment, more systematic approaches are
called for, if we are to use this construct to account for a wide
variety of HMC beyond task-oriented domains. Perhaps a
more comprehensive set of adjectives people use to describe
machines can be gleaned inductively from a large-scale survey
with a representative sample, which will help identify dimensions
on which people evaluate machines, either similarly or
differently, vis-a` -vis humans. In this regard, Hong et al.
(2022) proposed “creative machine heuristics” to capture
what human-like traits people expect of machines, focusing
on creativity in particular. Although the attempt to expand
the repertoire of machine heuristic seems well justified, they
focused on “how people think about machines being creative”
(p. 2) rather than how creative people think machines
are (or can be). If machine heuristic serves as a moderator of the source
effects, something one brings into the communication context,
then what would contribute to such beliefs? Usual suspects include
the exposure to media discourse, education, computer
proficiency, and direct or indirect experiences with machines.
Less obvious is the role of dissatisfaction with a human equivalent.
In one study (Lee et al., 2022), for instance, after witnessing
a human moderator’s unsatisfactory performance,
participants were more likely to endorse AI heuristic, suggesting
that people consider AI as a potential replacement of suboptimal
human agents. Possibly, disappointment with human
performance may lead people to project more optimistic or
wishful images unto AI.
