Critical genealogies of AI helpfully complicate origin stories that trace a linear progression from the emergence of machine models of mind in 17th century Europe to their formalization in mid-20th century cybernetics, cognitive science and computing.3 Histories of AI as a field typically locate its beginnings in the document that introduced the term, the Dartmouth Summer Research Project proposal ‘to proceed on the basis of the conjecture that every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it’ (McCarthy et al., 1955). Examining the field's onto-epistemic legacy from a feminist standpoint, Adam (1998) emphasizes the founding fathers’ reliance on key enabling premises that provide a through line across changes in techniques and technologies. These are a universalized figure of the knowing subject, simple realist assumptions about the significance of objects and erasures of the specificities of embodiment, location and relations in knowledge practices (see also Roberge and Castelle, 2021). Adam identifies AI's implicit knower as the canonical ‘disinterested moral philosopher’ (1998: 77), taken as the universal or interchangeable subject within a narrow membership group (composed historically of propertied, educated men). In contrast, she points out, feminist epistemology is concerned with the specificity of the knowing subject, the ‘S’ in propositional logics’ ‘S knows that p’. As Adam observes, asking ‘Who is S?’ is not considered a proper concern for traditional epistemologists (1998: 77). She takes as exemplary cases Soar, the project to implement Allen Newell and Herbert Simon's conception of a general human problem solver in the early 1970s (Newell and Simon, 1972), and Cyc, the effort of Douglas Lenat and colleagues (Guha and Lenat, 1990) beginning in the 1980s to design and build an encyclopaedic repository of ‘human consensus knowledge’ that could serve as a foundation for more robust and flexible expert systems. While Soar posited ‘problem-solving’ as a general, domain-independent procedure, Cyc inscribed ‘common sense knowledge’ as an arbitrarily extensible repository of propositions about the (one-world) world.4
Elish and boyd (2018) provide a concise critical history of the turn away from problem-solving and expert systems and towards the data-driven, statistical methods that comprise the currently dominant approaches of ‘machine learning’, ‘neural networks’, and their scaling up in convolutional neural networks or ‘deep learning’ systems.5 They trace how the turn to statistical methods was enabled by increases in computing power and a corporate embrace of Big Data beginning in the 1990s, followed by IBM's Watson project in the mid-2000s and the rebranding of Big Data as AI. Most recently, in response to growing evidence for the limits of data-driven approaches, critical practitioners within the field are calling for a return to symbolic logic as the basis for new ‘hybrid’ approaches (see Marcus, 2022; Heikkilä and Heaven, 2022). But this tacking back and forth between techniques fails to engage the starting premises and unexamined assumptions that critical genealogies of the field make evident (Dhaliwal et al., 2024).
In service of demystification, the term ‘AI’ can be read as a label for currently dominant computational techniques and technologies that extract statistical correlations (designated as patterns) from large datasets, based on the adjustment of relevant parameters according to either internally or externally generated feedback. At the time of this writing, research and development under the sign of AI primarily comprise so-called machine learning and neural network approaches, applied to projects of natural language processing (NLP), the analysis or generation of various forms of ‘content’ (e.g. text, images, data sets and computer code) and automated decision/recommendation systems. A growing community of critical practitioners is providing clarifying explanations of the operations of these technologies, abstaining from anthropomorphism in favour of careful redescription. I offer just a few indicative examples here.
Pasquinelli (2019) identifies three components in the production of a machine learning system. The first involves the generation of ‘training’ data, corpora of digitized traces of activities or events ‘captured’ as images, text or numerical records. The second component is the algorithm designed to extract patterns from the training data, by constructing a complex statistical association between input and output, consisting of potentially billions of individually adjusted parameters. Finally, when the output produced by the statistical model shows an adequate alignment or ‘fit’ with the training data (as assessed by human operators), it can be applied to automate the classification of patterns or predict the probability of the recurrence of a pattern in future data. Through their reliance on historical systems of classification and record-keeping, these techniques reproduce and amplify discriminatory practices. Perhaps most egregiously, they rely on the conflation of correlative and causal relations, a fallacy particularly problematic when it comes to prediction. As Pasquinelli (2019) emphasizes, this ‘is not a machine issue, but a political fallacy, when a statistical correlation between numbers within a dataset is received and accepted as causation among real entities in the world’.
